Feature/mongodb aws lambda (#587)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-and-AWS-Lambda.md

---
layout: post
authors: [nick_van_hoof]
title: 'Marrying MongoDB Atlas and AWS Lambda'
image: /img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/featured-image.png
tags: [MongoDB, Cloud, AWS, AWS Lambda, Serverless]
category: Cloud
comments: false
---

### Reading time: 10 min 30 sec

# Table of contents
* [MongoDB and AWS Lambda: a successful marriage?](#mongodb-and-aws-lambda-a-successful-marriage)
* [MongoDB and AWS Lambda: Why?](#mongodb-and-aws-lambda-why)

> * [MongoDB and AWS Lambda: Performance](#mongodb-and-aws-lambda-performance)

Reviewer: A bit too much repetition for my taste, can you drop the "MongoDB and AWS Lambda:" for the last 2 titles?

Author: Yes, will do.

# MongoDB and AWS Lambda: a successful marriage?

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/rings.png" width="15%" height="15%">
</div>

Can we use MongoDB Atlas when working with AWS Lambda?  
Yes we can!   
It's simple enough to setup and above all also performing well!  

This blog concerns mainly two things:
* Why would you use MongoDB + AWS Lambda and how does it perform
* How to create a production grade setup with vpc-peering

# MongoDB and AWS Lambda: Why?
As I am both a fan of AWS Lambda and MongoDB Atlas it was fun for me to marry them.  
However in the real world we don't do things for fun alone.  

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/mongodb-plus-aws-lambda.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

What are the motives to combine MongoDB Atlas and AWS Lambda?

* In case of MongoDB you provision your cluster and you know what you'll pay for it.
* MongoDB has a rich language to query within a collection
* On top of your data in MongoDB you can build rich dashboards for business intelligence.
* MongoDB supports joins over collections.

> * Support for lot's of indexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Supports up to 64 indexes per collection
* A wide variety of index types like hash, compound, unique, array, partial, TTL, geospatial, sparse, text and wildcard indexes
```

* Large documents allowed. A MongoDB document can be up to 16 Mb.
* Flexible data access. Also in a NoSQL world it is important to know your data access model. 
Data modeling is an important step that needs to be taken carefully before you start persisting your data.
The way your data is modelled will limit the access patterns that can be used on your data.
MongoDB offers you more flexibility to access your data in different ways after you have stored it.

> # MongoDB and AWS Lambda: Performance

Reviewer: Add some more explanation about what you are trying to measure with this.
"Performance" is very generic.
When reading this I would like to know upfront what you are going to measure, and for me this is not clear in the beginning .

Author: Okay I added a few lines above

Suppose you have setup access from your Lambda Functions to your MongoDB Atlas Cluster (If you want to know how, read more about it in the second part of this post).

> Since we are dealing with Lambda Functions we also have to deal with cold start. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we are dealing with Lambda Functions we also have to deal with a phenomenon called "cold start". 
```

This is the case for any Lambda Function no matter what database it connects to.

> MongoDB mentions on there website that there is an initial startup due to this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MongoDB mentions on there website that there is an initial startup delay due to this.
```
or something similar, it looks like there is a word missing here ?

> MongoDB mentions on there website that there is an initial startup due to this.

Reviewer: Add link to MongoDB or AWS documentation about "cold start"

Author: Will do

I am testing using the following setup:

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/Architecture.png">
</div>

Items are coming in via requests through the API.
The `APILambda` drops the items on a queue.  
A second Lambda Function `SaveMongoDBLambda` stores the items in the MongoDB database.

Other things important to know:

> * In the above setup I limit the maximum number of concurrently running Lambda Functions instances of `SaveMongoDBLambda` to 10.

Reviewer: Maybe explain why this limit? Don't know if it is important.

Author: It's actually to avoid a 1000 cold starts when I would not limit that. I'd rather have some items queueing up then 1000 cold starts of 7 seconds. Since buffering is often why a queue is used.
I have not added more explanation since I think it might create even more confusion for  people unfamiliar with Lambda concurrency.

Reviewer: 👍 this is not an intro to Lambda's either, fine with me

  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/coldstart.png" width="80%" height="80%">
</div>

We see that:
* Bootstrapping the runtime and code in the vpc lambda took 1.7 seconds.
* The initial connection is being made to the database which takes 5 seconds. 
This connection overhead is also there when using AWS native databases.
Though then it will be smaller.
* Saving the actual item took 1.1 second.

That's for the first execution of the Lambda Function.
How does this compare against a Lambda function that is already "warm".  
We can also analyse a warm lambda with XRAY.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/warm-execution.png" width="80%" height="80%">
</div>

Now we notice:
* Total execution took only 18 ms!
* There is no longer any initialization overhead.
* Storing the item took 6 ms!

## Performance conclusions

* Storing items in the database when the Lambda Function is already warm is blazingly fast.
* Initializing the connection in case of a cold start adds time to the cold start.

# VPC peering: connect your Lambda Functions with your MongoDB Atlas Cluster

> Wanna know how to set up a VPC peering connection between your AWS VPC and MongoDB Atlas Cluster?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Want to know how to set up a VPC peering connection between your AWS VPC and MongoDB Atlas Cluster?
```
"Wanna" is a bit to much slang, yadigg?

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/1-VPC-dashboard.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

Select that you want to create a VPC with a single public subnet.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/2-VPC-with-single-public-subnet.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

Specify how big you want the IP range of this VPC to be.
If you have trouble figuring out the relation between the `CIDR block` and the `Network Range` use one of the online converters to help you. ([https://www.ipaddressguide.com/cidr](https://www.ipaddressguide.com/cidr){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}) )  
Give your VPC and public subnet a name.  
Make sure that `enable DNS hostnames` is enabled.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/3-VPC-with-single-public-subnet-2.png" width="100%" height="100%">
</div>

Your VPC has been successfully created.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/4-VPC-successfully-created.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

> You will now notice that a new subnet and two new route tables have been created.  

Author: Will add more info.

That is a route table for your VPC and a route table specifically for your public subnet.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/5-new-subnet.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/6-new-route-tables.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

Before we go to MongoDB Atlas get some specific data about your VPC:
* Write down the VPC-id
* Write down the IPv4 CIDR of your VPC
* Write down the security group associated with this vpc.
Under security groups fetch the id of the security group that is associated with your vpc.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/7-security-group.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

> 

Author: I enlarged the images and added info about under which tab to find the information that you need to write down

</div>

Wait till your cluster is set up.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/m10-is-setup.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

In the Atlas UI navigate to `Security` -> `Network Access`.  
Hit `+ new peering connection` and select AWS as cloud provider.  
The below screen will pop up. Here you have to specify some configuration.
* Account ID: your AWS account Id which you can find under the 'My Account' in the AWS console
* VPC-id: Fill in the VPC-id that you copied from the vpc that you just created in AWS
* VPC CIDR: specify the CIDR block that you used to configure your vpc with on AWS
* region: the region where you created the AWS vpc

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/8-setup-peering-connection-atlas.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

Hit `Instantiate peering` !

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/9-pending-peering-connection.png" width="70%" height="70%">
</div>

> Notice that MongoDB created an `Atlas CIDR` which specifies the IP range in which your Atlas cluster will reside.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that MongoDB created an `Atlas CIDR` which specifies the IP range in which your Atlas cluster will reside.  Write this down, you will need it later on.
```

We are connecting the Atlas IP range with the IP range of our AWS VPC, hence VPC peering.

The peering connection is now pending.   

Go back to AWS.

## The AWS side (again)
In the VPC service of AWS go to `Peering Connections`.  

> You will a new peering request with stats `Pending Acceptance`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice a new peering request with status/which states `Pending Acceptance`.
```
feel free to adjust

Author: Updated as suggested

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/10-aws-peering-connection-request.png" width="80%" height="80%">
</div>

Accept this peering request!

Now you have to update your routing tables.

> AWS will also ask you `Do you want to update your routing tables` when you accept the peering request.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWS will also ask you `Do you want to update your routing tables` when you accept the peering request.  Click `Modify my route tables now`.
```

We will deploy our Lambda Functions in the public subnet of our VPC.
So we want to modify the route table that is associated with that subnet.
You can recognize that route table because it has an **explicit subnet association**.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/11-modify-route-table.png" width="100%" height="100%">
</div>

> Click `edit routes` and add a route towards your Atlas cluster.  

Reviewer: Edit which route table? In the image there are 3 different route tables

Author: Changed to Click `edit routes` when selecting the route table with an **explicit subnet association**

Author: Selecting the route table with an **explicit subnet association** and click `edit routes`.

What we are actually saying here is that we want to route all traffic to our Atlas cluster through the VPC peering connection.  
As `Destination` choose the Atlas CIDR and under `Target` choose your VPC peering connection.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/12-edit-routes.png" width="100%" height="100%">
</div>

Updating the route table will update the status of the peering connection to **available** in the Atlas UI.  
This takes a couple of minutes.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img src="/img/2020-02-17-Combining-MongoDB-Atlas-and-AWS-Lambda/13-peering-available.png" width="100%" height="100%">
</div>

### Deploy your lambda functions!

Deploy your Lambda functions to your VPC and test them out!  

> To deploy them in our vpc you have to configure there VPC config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy them in your VPC you have to configure the VPC config:
```

* use the pubic subnet that we just created
* specify the security group of you AWS vpc

> With AWS `SAM` that looks like this: 

Reviewer: Wait whut? I have no idea what to do next. What is `SAM`? Where is this yaml config coming from? How do you get to the deployed Lambda? What Lambda did you use?

Either link to other resources/blogpost/workshop material where you did this or explain how to setup a basic Lamba that tests the connection to MongoDB with the VPC peering.

* Combine the serverless capabilities of Lambda with the MongoDB strong points
* Payment model - In case of MongoDB you provision your cluster and you know what you'll pay for it, clusters can grow with your business without downtime or code changes.
* Flexible Data Acces - MongoDB has a rich query language and aggregation framework. On top of your data in MongoDB you can build nice dashboards for business intelligence. (eg. [MongoDB Charts](https://www.mongodb.com/products/charts))
* Indexes - Supports up to 64 indexes per collection with a wide variety of index types like hash, compound, unique, array, partial, TTL, geospatial, sparse, text and wildcard indexes
* Large documents allowed. A MongoDB document can be up to 16 Mb. 
* Performance - a built-in cache and support for lots of secondary indexes that can span across arrays and subdocuments, making virtually all queries very fast
* Tunable consistency[^1] 
* Observability - MongoDB exposes more than 100 different metrics and has a built-in performance advisor. Because "you can't optimize what you can't measure."
* Platform capabilities[^2] 
* Joinable documents [^3] 

> # Performance

Reviewer: What is Performance in this context?
Explain you are measuring the time it takes to store data in the database, with a "cold" and "warm" start

Author: I made updates. You can validate them again.

* [https://www.mongodb.com/compare/mongodb-dynamodb](https://www.mongodb.com/compare/mongodb-dynamodb)
* [https://www.educba.com/mongodb-vs-dynamodb/](https://www.educba.com/mongodb-vs-dynamodb/)
* [https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/optimizing-aws-lambda-performance-with-mongodb-atlas-and-nodejs](https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/optimizing-aws-lambda-performance-with-mongodb-atlas-and-nodejs)

## Footnotes
[^1]: Tunable consistency: from fire-and-forget over a quorum-based strong consistency up to full ACID-compliant transactions across globally distributed databases, you are in control. 
    In any case, indexes are always kept in sync in realtime with the data so your users will always find and work with the latest, correct data.

>     We hence call MongoDB a strong consistent database.  

Author: Akkoord, ik voel het ook zo aan en verander het

>     We hence call MongoDB a strong consistent database.  

Author: Ben je akkoord met het statement zelf? "Hence, we call MongoDB a strong consistent database"

>     We hence call MongoDB a strong consistent database.  

Reviewer: absoluut :-)
